=== ENGLISH TRANSLATION ===
Samuel Kostman - Yad Vashem Document 3555547
Translated from Hebrew

--- Page 21 ---
Yad Vashem Archives
YAD VASHEM ARCHIVES
RECORD GROUP:
FILE NUMBER:
NUMBER OF PAGES:
ORIGINAL ARCHIVE:
ORIGINAL FILE
NUMBER:
INVENTORY
NUMBER:
PREVIOUS FILE
NUMBER:
0.3
Yad Vashem Testimonies
Yad Vashem
Testimonies
1619
TRANSLATION
Section:
File Number:
Number of Pages:
Original Archive:
Original Reference:
Accession Number:
Previous File
Reference:
--- Page 22 ---
3555547
Yad Vashem Number: 1619_0.3
Testimony given by: Samuel Kostman (SAMUEL KOSTMAN), born in
Boryslaw, born on – 03.05.1908
Education: Secondary
Profession: Automobile mechanic
Address at the time of the described events:
Address at the time of giving testimony: Meon Herzliya, near the Sharon Hotel,
Tzrifim Akademaim
-
Places mentioned in the testimony: Boryslaw - BORYSLAW, Drohobycz -
DROHOBYCZ, Sambor – SAMBOR, Stryj – STRYJ,
-
-
-
WIEZIENIE SWIETOKRYSKIE (KIELCE), Kowel -
KRASNYSTAW, KOWEL, Lwow - LWOW, Stanislawow -
STANISLAWOW, Krakow – KRAKOW.
Names of people mentioned in the testimony: IZRAEL HAAS, ADAM HAJ
ELIASZ RISZELES, FILIP LIEBESMAN, HERMAN
LEINER, SAUL BORGMAN, EDWARD SZUST, MAKS
HEINBERG, SALOMON WAGMAN, MAKS STERN,
DIENSTAG, CHASKIELEWICZ, JAKOW
MORGENSTERN, LEON MANDEL, WIKTORIA
DICHTER, E. LESZCZYNSKI, GRABOWSKI,
BOTWILOW, POLEWKA, CZERNICHOW
-
Content of testimony: From self-defense against antisemitic pogroms in Poland to
fighting on the fronts against the Nazi army.
In a self-defense group against the antisemitic pogroms
-
in Boryslaw; killing of the commander of ZWIAZEK
STRELECKI during the confrontation with a group of antisemites
in 1935; as a prisoner in SWIETOKRZYSKIE prison;
between the years 1935 - 1939 abuse of prisoners after
the outbreak of the war and liberation of the prisoners by the Soviet army
in KRASNYSTAW on 17.09.1939; service in the Red
Army between the years 1940 – 1943; participation in battles.
-
1 - 1
-
--- Page 23 ---
-2-

Document source: "Yad Vashem", The Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority, Department for the Collection of Testimony, Jerusalem

Date and place of testimony: 15.04.1960, Herzliya

Testimony collector: Richard Loninski

Original language and number of pages: Polish, pages

Translator: Zvi Natan, Haifa (September 2005)

Typist: Levi Limor, Even-Yehuda

Proofreader: Lotem Eva, Holon

-
--- Page 24 ---
- 3 -
0.3_1619

Description of the witness's character and summary of his testimony.

The witness Shmuel Kostman possesses rich memories. In fact, one must distinguish between 2 periods in his life. The first period - until World War II. During this period, the witness actively participates in the struggle against national persecution - antisemitism. This is a form of struggle - revenge - against the antisemites and their gangs. If one takes into account that generally the form of revenge was passive, based on legal foundations, it is fitting to emphasize and describe in this light the actions of Shmuel Kostman. In certain Jewish circles there exists an opinion that Diaspora Jewry constituted a fainthearted mass, incapable of decisive resistance. Kostman's stance testifies to the contrary. In addition to this, Kostman was sentenced by a Polish court to 10 years imprisonment for his participation precisely in an act of revenge - for his attempt to seek justice in his own way, at a time when legal avenues were disappointing. With the outbreak of the war - the prison gates open before him, however it seems to me that one can determine that Shmuel Kostman is a man with merits in the struggle of the Jews for human dignity, regardless of whether you agree with this form of struggle or not. Here the facts determine.

The second period is the period of war at the front in the ranks of the Red Army against the German Army. The witness emphasizes in his testimony that he regarded this war as a continuation of the war against nationalism. This time its flag bearers were the Hittites [i.e., Nazis]. One can accept this determination if one takes into account his stance from before the war and also his maturity and life experience. Severely wounded, the witness leaves the army as a disabled person. The return to normal life is not easy. Even after the end of the war, the witness dedicates himself to Jewish matters and proves thereby that a warm Jewish heart truly beats within him.

15.04.1960

The Testimony.

The witness arrived in the country in June 1958.

By Mr. Richard Lewinsky (-)

Details about family members:

Name of his wife: MATYLDA, born in 1914, daughter of Moshe and Anna.

Names of his sisters: Genia, Lutza, Ida.

Name of his brothers: Edmund (perished in Borysław in 1941)
Victor (resides in Poland).

-
--- Page 25 ---
**Content of the Testimony.**

---

I was born in Boryslaw in 1908. My father was a clerk for 35 years at an oil mine belonging to the firm "FANTO". He was a half-believer, more accurately - traditional. Hence, in our family we observed the customs of Jewish tradition, but we were not devout. I was the eldest in the family and when father was called up for army service, I began working to support myself and the family.

I was part of a Jewish youth group, which already at that time engaged in sports, in order to strengthen the body. By nature I was energetic and active, and therefore I quickly rose to the position of group leader. My friends were: Israel Haas (currently in Israel), Adas Hai (today in Israel), Eliash Rishles (currently in Poland), Philip Libsen and Herman Leiner (perished). Over time, our youth group became the leader of our generation and excelled in its activity, combat readiness, and sports achievements. The days that followed proved that those characteristics became necessary and influenced our activities. In the first years after World War I, we did not yet feel an organized antisemitic movement in Boryslaw. In the years 1925/26 anti-Jewish movements already began, and only in the thirties, and especially after Hitler's victory, did they intensify. The Jews of Boryslaw were a solidary and well-organized community. This was influenced by the fact that most Jews worked in large oil enterprises, wax factories, etc. In addition, there were many craftsmen, porters, transport workers, and more. The merchant class was fairly large.

When the organized antisemitic movement began, the stance of all these was solidary, but limited itself to what is called: passive resistance. They generally sought legal protection from the administrative authorities and the police. They utilized influences and connections with Polish circles in order to halt antisemitic activity, of course with varying success.

As far as I remember, until the death of PILSUDSKI in 1935, these connections often yielded many achievements. I remember that after PILSUDSKI's death, many Jews in Boryslaw actually wept, because they tied their fate, the stability of the situation, to Pilsudski's personality. The creation of the "Camp of National Unity," as if an official control of the antisemitic enterprise, greatly revived nationalist elements of Boryslaw. At the head of this action were men of "STRZELEC", the SOKOLOW organization, etc. Hooligans and underworld elements also joined them. Cases of Jews being beaten by gangs composed of these elements began more and more frequently.
--- Page 26 ---
-5-

On an ever-growing scale, an economic boycott campaign began, a siege on Jewish shops. The nationalist elements felt themselves strengthened, while sensing the quiet support of the ruling authorities. Hence, the forms of protection for Jews that had existed until that time became insufficient. Therefore, largely through the initiative of our youth group, which I mentioned above, we began to actively respond to the persecutions. Thus, when it came to our knowledge that in a certain place Jewish shops were about to be boycotted or Jews were simply attacked, we launched retaliatory action. We were a group of young, healthy, and athletic individuals, and we were ready to provide assistance to those who suffered. The Jews of Borysław, Drohobych, and other places knew of our activity and our stance, and therefore they would often turn to us and request help. No one gave patronage to our organization and no one assisted it financially. Our warm hearts and our strong fists could not accept the fact that our brethren were being beaten with impunity. They knew of us in the city of Borysław, Drohobych, and even Sambor and Stryj, that in times of pogroms we would immediately rush to help, if it was at all possible. More than once we succeeded in dispersing gangs of hooligans - antisemites, and this encouraged us in our struggle. Of course, more than once we came into conflict with the police. More than once the police arrested members of our group, but after some time we succeeded in extracting our comrades from prison. In this, the local Jews helped us. Among others, a well-known merchant from Drohobych, Shaul Borgman, intervened in such cases, and thanks to his financial support we managed to avoid major conflicts with the authorities. I do not wish to elaborate extensively on our activities. I have only described in general terms what they consisted of. This type of activity we conducted until mid-1935, that is to say, until the period of a serious confrontation with the nationalists and more severe consequences. In this case, the consequences affected me personally, and therefore I wish to describe the events in greater detail.

On 03.03.1935, incidents of beating Jews occurred in Borysław. After several days, [our group] responded actively and dispersed a gang of Endek attackers. After several more days, on 11.03.1935, we comrades (Yisrael Haas, Edward Schust, Max Heinberg, and Shlomo Wagman) were together at a nightclub in Borysław. When we left the club at midnight, we were attacked by a group of "Sokoli" consisting of 6 men. They opened fire on us with pistols. As a result of the shooting, the deputy commander of the STRZELEC organization in Borysław, named Edmund Leszczyński, was killed. We dispersed to our homes. At dawn we were arrested and handed over to the prosecution authorities. The attack on us was undoubtedly planned in advance with the purpose of eliminating or paralyzing our group and thereby also the Jewish self-defense in our area.
--- Page 27 ---
- 6 -

We remained under interrogation until mid-May 1935. In the middle of May, our group's trial opened at the court in Sambor.

The trial lasted 3 days. The authorities did not know exactly from whom the bullet that killed was fired. This was not clarified during the interrogation. The guilty man did not confess. This is what we decided among ourselves, until the situation would be clarified. What was the matter? Besides me, my comrades in the group had family ties (wife, children). If the punishment was to fall upon someone among us, we wanted to direct matters so that it would fall upon a person who did not have a family. In addition, other problems were also taken into consideration. The Jews of Borysław, whom I mentioned above, made efforts and interventions with the authorities to release us, or at least to lighten our punishment. All of this became known to us indirectly. Our activities were known and therefore those who defended us were also defending themselves. Besides Borgman Shaul, merchants such as Max Stern, Herman Stern, and Dienstag came to our defense. They also provided us with lawyers for our defense and according to rumor, they were supposed to receive assurance regarding a light sentence. We took all these factors into consideration and I decided to take the blame upon myself. I took into account various factors, that I had not served a sentence until now, my good behavior inside the prison and the amnesty. My calculations proved to be too optimistic. I did not take into account what government was then in Poland and what factors were decisive.

The verdict of the jurors was harsh. I received 10 years in prison. Upon appeal regarding the verdict, I was sent to serve my sentence in the ŚWIĘTOKRZYSKIE prison in the Kielce district.

Experiences from the prison constitute a separate chapter, requiring separate treatment. I do not wish to develop it; I only wish to touch upon a few details.

-

It is known to all that prison is a difficult school in life. Not everyone can even withstand the conditions of prison. I, personally, went through a very difficult period in prison in a calculated manner. First of all, because I was a Jew and convicted of killing a Pole. I was persecuted by the prison administration in a calculated manner. They made things difficult for me and prevented me from receiving mail, food packages - and more than once they imposed solitary confinement upon me. They addressed me with the words: "Jew! You killed a Pole." From the prison they led us to work on the KIELCE – SŁUPIE road in shackles weighing 12 kg. On the road we crushed and broke apart rocks and stones. And so, amidst hard labor, abuse and persecution, time passed. My hopes for early release came to naught. At the head of the Ministry of Justice stood a known antisemite by the name of GRABOWSKI, who instituted an iron regime in the prison. It is necessary to mention here the prison warden who was a former officer
--- Page 28 ---
-7-

in the Tsar's army - BOTWILOW. It was widely known that this Botwilow had been retired, but when the ONZ came to power in Poland, he was recalled as a tyrant and cruel man. My salvation was the outbreak of war. About two days after the outbreak of war in 1939, at midnight, they bound the prisoners in pairs - pairs by their hands and feet and prepared them for evacuation. I was bound to a Jewish prisoner named Chaskelwitz. He was at the center of a famous incident before the war. Chaskelwitz had shot a sergeant named BUJAK in the army. After our departure from the prison, they led us along various roads - without food, without water, and without any assistance. The guard escorting us was very large. For approximately 900 prisoners there were 500 armed guards. At every attempt to rest, they beat us until we lost consciousness. Escape under these conditions was out of the question. When we reached the Kovel area, my pair could no longer continue walking and requested [to stop] immediately, and then the guard commander named POKRYWKA drew his pistol and shot Chaskelwitz straight in the forehead and his brains scattered in all directions. I waited for a similar fate. Since they did not want to separate us, I was forced to carry the dead man on my back. Only along the way, in some prison during a rest period, they opened the shackles and bound me with another prisoner named JAN ZAWADZKI. They rushed us in the opposite direction to KRASNYSTAW, where we stopped at a local prison. The prison commander took pity on us and ordered soup to be cooked for us. They separated us and we were placed in cells. At night at 02:00 a bomb fell on the corner of the prison. The guards panicked, left us locked in our cells and fled, while taking our personal belongings with them on carts. In the morning, seeing that there was no administration in the prison, we began to break down doors. The door in my cell was broken first. I found tools and opened all the other doors. We were free, but still locked in the prison courtyard. We made a human ladder, climbed the wall and began calling for help. The local people came to our aid, broke down the main gate, and we became truly free. Now we split into small groups and set out on the road. My companion-partner was one of a kind. He was a Jew, a mohel by profession. He was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment because his daughter had an illegitimate child with a Pole who had abandoned her. The grandfather wanted to make his grandson Jewish, performed a circumcision, and as a result the infant died. For this offense he received his sentence, and like me, the war liberated him. We headed toward Lvov. Approximately 5-6 km before Lvov, Soviet soldiers stopped me and took me to headquarters as a suspicious person, without papers. On my shirt was a stamp from the prison. After a lengthy interrogation I was released. At that time the battles and war of Poland ended, and the Soviet army took control of the territories of Western Ukraine and Belarus. When the Germans
--- Page 29 ---
- 8 -

retreated from Borislav, I traveled to my hometown and decided to enlist as a volunteer in the Red Army. I regarded this step as a natural continuation of my struggle against nationalism from before the war. I was accepted and attached as a car driver for the Sanitary Service of the city of Lvov, Major CZERNICHOW. With him I traveled for a certain period in Borislav. I married a woman and after two months I transferred my family to Lvov and resided there. After some time, my unit commander was transferred to the headquarters of the 12th Army in the city of Stanislavov and I went with him as well. In Stanislavov I served in the role of transport manager in a military unit until the outbreak of war between Russia and Germany in 1941. On the day the war broke out - I was attached together with my superior to the Stryi airfield team. Our task was the evacuation of civilians, wounded, etc., that is to say ensuring their transfer to the airfield. Within the framework of my duties I was compelled to remain until the end. Upon completion of the evacuation operations I departed by car following the unit. Near Kharkov I was wounded in my leg, they loaded me onto a sanitary train and I was hospitalized in a hospital 20 km from Kharkov. After my recovery I was assigned to military unit 2146 and together with it I participated in the defense of Moscow. Upon conclusion of the operation near Moscow they transferred us by vehicles to the Stalingrad area. During the military operations near Stalingrad I was wounded in my abdomen and in addition fell into encirclement. I succeeded together with my comrades to break out of the encirclement and cross over to my unit. As a seriously wounded person they transferred me to the rear. They transferred me to a military hospital in the town of BEREZNIKI in Orel (Molotov district). In the hospital I lay for about 5 months. As a result of complications they removed my spleen through surgery. I was discharged from the hospital as a war invalid in 1943. I traveled to DZAMBUL in Kazakhstan. I received a position there as technical manager of large garages of transport vehicles supplying food to the army. I received the position as a professional and as a war invalid. I utilized my position as needed, in order to provide assistance to Jews living near me. Many of them I employed in the enterprises under my authority. Here I can specify names of people: Yaakov Morgenstern who resides in Herzliya Bet, Nof-Yam. I also had the opportunity to help people materially, which I did extensively for many Jews from Poland. Some of them are now in Israel, for example: Feldinger who resides in Bat Yam, the Oppenheim family from Tel Aviv and others. After the liberation of the territories in the Lvov area at the end of 1944/45 I was assigned to organize the hospital in Lvov on KRASICKI Street as administrative manager. There too I utilized my position and connections for the purpose of providing assistance to my Jewish brethren. In one case of my intervention I went too far and bore the consequences. One person named
--- Page 30 ---
LEON MANDEL (currently in Israel, in Givatayim) was arrested by the N.K.W.D for trading in foreign currency and gold. He faced the danger of 10 years imprisonment, because the Russians treated such matters as a political offense. I intervened on his behalf and I too was arrested by the N.K.W.D and accused of sympathizing with or being a partner in the business. I sat in prison for 3 months. They proved nothing against me, but I was completely ruined and robbed of everything I had. I was released after defending myself and was sentenced to one year's suspended imprisonment. Despite the lesson I learned, I did not give in and still managed to release the aforementioned Mandel from prison, lead him to the border, and from there he escaped to Poland. Of course, I did not return to my work, but I managed to travel to Poland as a returnee to the homeland. I want to add that after my return to Lvov I turned to searching for my family in Borysław. From the not many people who survived, I learned that my entire family was murdered by the Germans and buried in a mass grave near the slaughterhouse in Borysław... Also my wife and our children. They did not manage to evacuate together with me. After my return to Poland, I traveled to Kraków, where I was accepted to work as a transport supervisor at the WOJ M.O. headquarters. I worked there less than a year and resigned because the work did not suit me. I started working at a Kraków enterprise for cattle circulation - livestock as transport manager. In this position I worked about 3 years. I resigned and received work at the enterprise being built - NOWA HUTA. There I encountered severe antisemitic phenomena. This was expressed in their attitude toward Jewish workers. Difficulties in accepting new ones and various abuses. I continued supervising transport and when one day I hired a Jewish woman named Victoria Dichter (currently in Israel), a revolt was organized against her acceptance, but somehow I came out of it with the upper hand. In various ways they came to me with complaints that I had hired a Jewish woman. Relations were quite tense. Upon my arrival in Kraków I established a new family, I married a wife - now I have a wife, a teacher by profession, and also 2 children. Meanwhile, that is to say in the years 1947/48, I participated in Zionist organization activities in the Kraków area (Poalei Zion) and in sending people across the border. Besides this, I helped the organization financially by paying sums for the benefit of "Fighting Palestine." I have written confirmations of this. To Israel I wanted
--- Page 31 ---
- 10 -

to travel already earlier, in the years 1948/49, but I received a refusal in writing. I could no longer decide on crossing borders illegally at that time, when on my shoulders lay the responsibility for a family with a small child.

As I analyze today and see the matter of the attitude toward Jews in different periods during the war, I determine that in the army, at the front, I generally did not see antisemitic phenomena. But in the rear there were clear phenomena, especially in view of the phenomenon of concentration of evacuated Jews in cities. Very characteristic was the antisemitism after the war in the Soviet territories. This antisemitism had a character as if from above, semi-official. These were restrictions in acceptance for employment, especially for important positions. These were the beginnings of the later policy of national regulation. This does not mean that antisemitism was only the doing of government authorities. It encountered fertile ground among various nationalist elements.

During my stay in Krakow I became closely acquainted with the director of "The House of the Book" - Mr. EDWARD SZYMCZUCH. This man knew about my experiences in the past and said more than once that they were worthy of literary treatment. On a certain occasion he introduced me to a Krakow writer by the name of ADAM POLEWKA. He was interested in my memories, especially from the prison period, and he too was of the opinion that they were worthy of treatment. He proposed that we meet, with the intention of putting my memories and experiences in writing. I agreed to his proposal and went more than once to Mr. Polewka in the evenings, while he wrote down by hand details from my stories. However, these meetings took place with large gaps and not in a regular manner, so that they did not cover the full scope of my experiences, but only fragments. These notes by Polewka are in my possession, but at this moment I do not remember their location. Since I am still residing in temporary housing, that is to say in a shack, and most of the things are still packed. In truth, Polewka's death put an end to it and did not allow the recording of my memories to be completed.
--- Page 32 ---
- 11 -

I wish to complete and say that I worked as transport manager at NOWA HUTA until the time of my departure - my journey, that is to say in 1958. Obtaining a permit for my journey did not come easily to me either. Already at that time they handled matters on an individual basis and created difficulties in certain cases. When I obtained the permit, I first sent my wife and children, and only afterwards, after 3 months, when my wife was already in Israel, I left Poland and in 1958 I arrived in Israel.
--- Page 33 ---
Telesko
Podpis [Signature]
Prepare for the camps.
100.-
KOLONIE LETNIE [SUMMER CAMPS]
HHLAIR [unclear]
GORDONIA-MAKABI HACAIR
W POLSCE [IN POLAND]
Jewish National Fund
[unclear] 5[?]
50 zł
- 12 -
--- Page 34 ---
CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF JEWS IN POLAND
COMMISSION FOR AID TO FIGHTING PALESTINE
Commission for Aid to Fighting Eretz-Israel
FIGHTING PALESTINE
No. 02626
Citizen
40
Kostman Jammer!
Prokoli 12/9
1000 zł.
[unclear]
CENTRAL COMMITTEE
COMMISSION FOR AID TO FIGHTING PALESTINE
Commission for Aid to Fighting Eretz-Israel
FIGHTING PALESTINE
No. 02628
Citizen Kostman Seven.
1000 zł.
Or [Light]
CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF JEWS IN POLAND
COMMISSION FOR AID TO FIGHTING PALESTINE
Commission for Aid to Fighting Eretz-Israel
FIGHTING PALESTI[NE]
No. 602627
Citizen
Kortman Lammed
1000 zł.
Adar
- 13 -
