-7-

in the Tsar's army - BOTWILOW. It was widely known that this Botwilow had been retired, but when the ONZ came to power in Poland, he was recalled as a tyrant and cruel man. My salvation was the outbreak of war. About two days after the outbreak of war in 1939, at midnight, they bound the prisoners in pairs - pairs by their hands and feet and prepared them for evacuation. I was bound to a Jewish prisoner named Chaskelwitz. He was at the center of a famous incident before the war. Chaskelwitz had shot a sergeant named BUJAK in the army. After our departure from the prison, they led us along various roads - without food, without water, and without any assistance. The guard escorting us was very large. For approximately 900 prisoners there were 500 armed guards. At every attempt to rest, they beat us until we lost consciousness. Escape under these conditions was out of the question. When we reached the Kovel area, my pair could no longer continue walking and requested [to stop] immediately, and then the guard commander named POKRYWKA drew his pistol and shot Chaskelwitz straight in the forehead and his brains scattered in all directions. I waited for a similar fate. Since they did not want to separate us, I was forced to carry the dead man on my back. Only along the way, in some prison during a rest period, they opened the shackles and bound me with another prisoner named JAN ZAWADZKI. They rushed us in the opposite direction to KRASNYSTAW, where we stopped at a local prison. The prison commander took pity on us and ordered soup to be cooked for us. They separated us and we were placed in cells. At night at 02:00 a bomb fell on the corner of the prison. The guards panicked, left us locked in our cells and fled, while taking our personal belongings with them on carts. In the morning, seeing that there was no administration in the prison, we began to break down doors. The door in my cell was broken first. I found tools and opened all the other doors. We were free, but still locked in the prison courtyard. We made a human ladder, climbed the wall and began calling for help. The local people came to our aid, broke down the main gate, and we became truly free. Now we split into small groups and set out on the road. My companion-partner was one of a kind. He was a Jew, a mohel by profession. He was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment because his daughter had an illegitimate child with a Pole who had abandoned her. The grandfather wanted to make his grandson Jewish, performed a circumcision, and as a result the infant died. For this offense he received his sentence, and like me, the war liberated him. We headed toward Lvov. Approximately 5-6 km before Lvov, Soviet soldiers stopped me and took me to headquarters as a suspicious person, without papers. On my shirt was a stamp from the prison. After a lengthy interrogation I was released. At that time the battles and war of Poland ended, and the Soviet army took control of the territories of Western Ukraine and Belarus. When the Germans