-8-
time.-In Borysław I got married and after 2 months
I moved my family to Lwów-where we settled. After some
time the commander of my unit was transferred on duty
to the staff of the 12th Army in the town of Stanisławów, where I also went along
with him. In Stanisławów I served as head of transport
in the military unit, until the outbreak of the German-Soviet
war in 1941. On the day the war broke out I was assigned along
with my superior to the Stryj airfield. Our task was
evacuating the civilian population, the wounded, etc., that is to say ensuring
their transport to the airfield. Due to the nature of my duties it
followed that I had to stay until the very end. After completing the evacuation
operations I set out by car following the unit. Near
Charków I was wounded in the leg, loaded onto a hospital train
and placed in a hospital 20 km beyond Charków. After recovery
I was assigned to military unit 2146 and together
with it I take part in the defense of Moscow. After the conclusion of the operation near
Moscow we were transported by cars to the Stalingrad region.
During military operations in the vicinity of Stalingrad I was
wounded in the abdomen and on top of that fell into encirclement. I managed
together with my comrades to break out of the encirclement and get through to
our own forces. As seriously wounded I am evacuated deep to the rear.
Namely I was transported to a military hospital in the town of Berez-
niki in the Urals /Molotov oblast/. In the hospital I lay
for about 5 months. Due to complications my spleen was removed
surgically. From the hospital I was discharged as a
war invalid in 1943. I went to the town of Dzhambul in the Kazakh
SSR. There I obtained employment as technical director
of large motor transport garages, supplying
food for the army. I received this position as a specialist and
a war invalid. I used my position as much as possible
to provide assistance to Jews living there. Many
I hired to work in the establishments under my supervision. Here I can provide
names: Yaakov Morgenstern residing in Herzliya B Nof-Yam.