-10-
in the capacity of transport supervisor. In this position I worked for approximately 3 years, after which I resigned and took up work in the Nowa Huta construction site. There I encountered manifestations of strong antisemitism. It manifested itself in the treatment of Jewish workers, creating difficulties in hiring new ones, and in various other forms of harassment. I personally continued to be in charge of transport, and when one day I hired a Jewish woman, Wiktoria Dichter /currently in Israel/, a revolt was organized against her hiring, but I emerged from this ordeal unscathed. Through various channels I was bitterly reproached for hiring a Jewish woman for work. Relations were quite difficult. After arriving in Kraków, I started a new family, I got married—I now have a wife who is a teacher by profession, and two children. In the meantime, i.e., at the turn of 1947/48, I took active part in the Zionist organization in the Kraków area, Poalej Sjon/, as well as in sending people across the border. In addition, I provided considerable financial assistance to the organization by contributing appropriate sums to "Fighting Palestine." I have written confirmations of this. I wished to leave for Israel earlier, at the turn of 1948/49, but I received a written refusal. I could no longer decide to force the border, burdened as I was with a family and a small child.—As I analyze and see today the matter of attitudes toward Jews in various periods of wartime, I would like to state that in the frontline army I generally did not observe manifestations of antisemitism. However, in the rear areas there were already clear signs of it, especially in view of the phenomenon of large concentrations of evacuated Jews in far rear cities. Quite characteristic was the postwar antisemitism in Soviet territories. It had, as it were, a top-down, semi-official character. What came into play here were primarily harassment in hiring for work, especially for more prominent positions. These were the beginnings of the nationality regulation policy that was continued later. This does not mean that antisemitism was solely the work of ruling factors. It found fertile ground below, among the most diverse nationalistic elements.—