- 6 -

We remained under interrogation until mid-May 1935. In the middle of May, our group's trial opened at the court in Sambor.

The trial lasted 3 days. The authorities did not know exactly from whom the bullet that killed was fired. This was not clarified during the interrogation. The guilty man did not confess. This is what we decided among ourselves, until the situation would be clarified. What was the matter? Besides me, my comrades in the group had family ties (wife, children). If the punishment was to fall upon someone among us, we wanted to direct matters so that it would fall upon a person who did not have a family. In addition, other problems were also taken into consideration. The Jews of Borysław, whom I mentioned above, made efforts and interventions with the authorities to release us, or at least to lighten our punishment. All of this became known to us indirectly. Our activities were known and therefore those who defended us were also defending themselves. Besides Borgman Shaul, merchants such as Max Stern, Herman Stern, and Dienstag came to our defense. They also provided us with lawyers for our defense and according to rumor, they were supposed to receive assurance regarding a light sentence. We took all these factors into consideration and I decided to take the blame upon myself. I took into account various factors, that I had not served a sentence until now, my good behavior inside the prison and the amnesty. My calculations proved to be too optimistic. I did not take into account what government was then in Poland and what factors were decisive.

The verdict of the jurors was harsh. I received 10 years in prison. Upon appeal regarding the verdict, I was sent to serve my sentence in the ŚWIĘTOKRZYSKIE prison in the Kielce district.

Experiences from the prison constitute a separate chapter, requiring separate treatment. I do not wish to develop it; I only wish to touch upon a few details.

-

It is known to all that prison is a difficult school in life. Not everyone can even withstand the conditions of prison. I, personally, went through a very difficult period in prison in a calculated manner. First of all, because I was a Jew and convicted of killing a Pole. I was persecuted by the prison administration in a calculated manner. They made things difficult for me and prevented me from receiving mail, food packages - and more than once they imposed solitary confinement upon me. They addressed me with the words: "Jew! You killed a Pole." From the prison they led us to work on the KIELCE – SŁUPIE road in shackles weighing 12 kg. On the road we crushed and broke apart rocks and stones. And so, amidst hard labor, abuse and persecution, time passed. My hopes for early release came to naught. At the head of the Ministry of Justice stood a known antisemite by the name of GRABOWSKI, who instituted an iron regime in the prison. It is necessary to mention here the prison warden who was a former officer