-8-

It is commonly known that prison is a hard school of life. Not everyone endures prison conditions. I personally lived through a difficult period in prison. First and foremost because I was a Jew and on top of that convicted of killing a Pole. I was persecuted by the prison administration in a refined manner. They made it difficult for me to receive correspondence, food parcels - I was repeatedly sentenced to solitary confinement on completely groundless charges. They addressed me with these words: "Jew, you killed a Pole." We were led out of the prison to work on the Słupia-Kielce road in shackles weighing 12 kg. On the road we broke stones. And so time passed in hard labor and incessant harassment. My hopes for early release did not come true. At the head of the Ministry of Justice at that time stood the well-known Jew-hater Grabowski, who introduced an iron prison regime. One should also mention here the person of the prison warden, who was a former Tsarist officer Botwiłow. It is telling that the aforementioned Botwiłow had been retired, but after the OZN came to power in Poland he was called back as a known satrap and tyrant. The outbreak of war was to become my actual salvation. On the 2nd day after the outbreak of war in 1939, at 12 o'clock at night, the prisoners were shackled in pairs by hands and feet and prepared for evacuation. I was shackled with a Jewish prisoner named Chaskielewicz. It was a famous case before the war. Chaskielewicz had shot and killed a non-commissioned officer Sgt. Bujak in the army. After leaving the prison we were led along various roads without food, without water and without the slightest assistance. The escort was enormous. For approximately 900 prisoners there were about 500 armed escort guards. At every attempt to rest, they beat us unconscious; escape under these conditions of course was out of the question. When we reached the vicinity of Kowel, my companion Chaskielewicz could no longer walk and asked for water. Then the prison guard corporal escorting us, named Pokrywka, drew his revolver and shot Chaskielewicz straight in the forehead, so that his brain splattered over all of us. I expected the same for myself