141
our activities and stance, hence we were frequently approached
with requests for help. No one patronized our organization,
nor did anyone finance it. Simply our ardent hearts
and strong fists could not reconcile themselves with the fact of unpunished beating
of our brethren. We were known throughout Borysław, Droho-
bycz, even Sambor and Stryj, that during disturbances we would immediately
rush to help, if only it was possible. On numerous occasions
we managed to disperse hooligan-antisemitic gangs and this
gave us courage in our struggle. Of course, there were
conflicts with the Polish police. On more than one occasion the police arrested
some members of our group, but after some time we managed
to get our comrades out of prison. Here in
turn local Jews helped us. Among others, the well-known merchant
of Drohobycz Saul Borgman intervened in such cases and even
thanks to his financial support we managed to avoid larger
conflicts with the authorities. I do not wish to elaborate too long on the details
of our activities. I have more or less characterized what
it consisted of. This very kind of activity we carried
out until mid-1935, that is, until the period of a more serious clash
with the nationalists and even more serious consequences.—
In this case, these consequences concerned above all me,
therefore I would like to discuss these events in more detail.—
On March 3, 1935, incidents of beating Jews took place in Borysław.
Our group actively intervened and dispersed a gang of Endek
assailants. A few days later, on March 11, 1935, we were together
with colleagues /Izrael Haas, Edward Szust, Maks Heinberg
and Salomon Wagman/ at a nightclub in Borysław. Leaving the
establishment at 12 o'clock at night we were attacked by a group
of "Sokół" members consisting of 6 persons. They opened fire at us with pistols.
One of our colleagues returned fire with a revolver. As a re-
sult of the shooting, the deputy commander of the Riflemen's Association
in Borysław by the name of Edmund Leszczyński was killed.—
We scattered to our homes. At dawn we were arrested
and placed at the disposal of the prosecutorial authorities.—