-5-

On an ever-growing scale, an economic boycott campaign began, a siege on Jewish shops. The nationalist elements felt themselves strengthened, while sensing the quiet support of the ruling authorities. Hence, the forms of protection for Jews that had existed until that time became insufficient. Therefore, largely through the initiative of our youth group, which I mentioned above, we began to actively respond to the persecutions. Thus, when it came to our knowledge that in a certain place Jewish shops were about to be boycotted or Jews were simply attacked, we launched retaliatory action. We were a group of young, healthy, and athletic individuals, and we were ready to provide assistance to those who suffered. The Jews of Borysław, Drohobych, and other places knew of our activity and our stance, and therefore they would often turn to us and request help. No one gave patronage to our organization and no one assisted it financially. Our warm hearts and our strong fists could not accept the fact that our brethren were being beaten with impunity. They knew of us in the city of Borysław, Drohobych, and even Sambor and Stryj, that in times of pogroms we would immediately rush to help, if it was at all possible. More than once we succeeded in dispersing gangs of hooligans - antisemites, and this encouraged us in our struggle. Of course, more than once we came into conflict with the police. More than once the police arrested members of our group, but after some time we succeeded in extracting our comrades from prison. In this, the local Jews helped us. Among others, a well-known merchant from Drohobych, Shaul Borgman, intervened in such cases, and thanks to his financial support we managed to avoid major conflicts with the authorities. I do not wish to elaborate extensively on our activities. I have only described in general terms what they consisted of. This type of activity we conducted until mid-1935, that is to say, until the period of a serious confrontation with the nationalists and more severe consequences. In this case, the consequences affected me personally, and therefore I wish to describe the events in greater detail.

On 03.03.1935, incidents of beating Jews occurred in Borysław. After several days, [our group] responded actively and dispersed a gang of Endek attackers. After several more days, on 11.03.1935, we comrades (Yisrael Haas, Edward Schust, Max Heinberg, and Shlomo Wagman) were together at a nightclub in Borysław. When we left the club at midnight, we were attacked by a group of "Sokoli" consisting of 6 men. They opened fire on us with pistols. As a result of the shooting, the deputy commander of the STRZELEC organization in Borysław, named Edmund Leszczyński, was killed. We dispersed to our homes. At dawn we were arrested and handed over to the prosecution authorities. The attack on us was undoubtedly planned in advance with the purpose of eliminating or paralyzing our group and thereby also the Jewish self-defense in our area.