- 8 -

retreated from Borislav, I traveled to my hometown and decided to enlist as a volunteer in the Red Army. I regarded this step as a natural continuation of my struggle against nationalism from before the war. I was accepted and attached as a car driver for the Sanitary Service of the city of Lvov, Major CZERNICHOW. With him I traveled for a certain period in Borislav. I married a woman and after two months I transferred my family to Lvov and resided there. After some time, my unit commander was transferred to the headquarters of the 12th Army in the city of Stanislavov and I went with him as well. In Stanislavov I served in the role of transport manager in a military unit until the outbreak of war between Russia and Germany in 1941. On the day the war broke out - I was attached together with my superior to the Stryi airfield team. Our task was the evacuation of civilians, wounded, etc., that is to say ensuring their transfer to the airfield. Within the framework of my duties I was compelled to remain until the end. Upon completion of the evacuation operations I departed by car following the unit. Near Kharkov I was wounded in my leg, they loaded me onto a sanitary train and I was hospitalized in a hospital 20 km from Kharkov. After my recovery I was assigned to military unit 2146 and together with it I participated in the defense of Moscow. Upon conclusion of the operation near Moscow they transferred us by vehicles to the Stalingrad area. During the military operations near Stalingrad I was wounded in my abdomen and in addition fell into encirclement. I succeeded together with my comrades to break out of the encirclement and cross over to my unit. As a seriously wounded person they transferred me to the rear. They transferred me to a military hospital in the town of BEREZNIKI in Orel (Molotov district). In the hospital I lay for about 5 months. As a result of complications they removed my spleen through surgery. I was discharged from the hospital as a war invalid in 1943. I traveled to DZAMBUL in Kazakhstan. I received a position there as technical manager of large garages of transport vehicles supplying food to the army. I received the position as a professional and as a war invalid. I utilized my position as needed, in order to provide assistance to Jews living near me. Many of them I employed in the enterprises under my authority. Here I can specify names of people: Yaakov Morgenstern who resides in Herzliya Bet, Nof-Yam. I also had the opportunity to help people materially, which I did extensively for many Jews from Poland. Some of them are now in Israel, for example: Feldinger who resides in Bat Yam, the Oppenheim family from Tel Aviv and others. After the liberation of the territories in the Lvov area at the end of 1944/45 I was assigned to organize the hospital in Lvov on KRASICKI Street as administrative manager. There too I utilized my position and connections for the purpose of providing assistance to my Jewish brethren. In one case of my intervention I went too far and bore the consequences. One person named