LEON MANDEL (currently in Israel, in Givatayim) was arrested by the N.K.W.D for trading in foreign currency and gold. He faced the danger of 10 years imprisonment, because the Russians treated such matters as a political offense. I intervened on his behalf and I too was arrested by the N.K.W.D and accused of sympathizing with or being a partner in the business. I sat in prison for 3 months. They proved nothing against me, but I was completely ruined and robbed of everything I had. I was released after defending myself and was sentenced to one year's suspended imprisonment. Despite the lesson I learned, I did not give in and still managed to release the aforementioned Mandel from prison, lead him to the border, and from there he escaped to Poland. Of course, I did not return to my work, but I managed to travel to Poland as a returnee to the homeland. I want to add that after my return to Lvov I turned to searching for my family in Borysław. From the not many people who survived, I learned that my entire family was murdered by the Germans and buried in a mass grave near the slaughterhouse in Borysław... Also my wife and our children. They did not manage to evacuate together with me. After my return to Poland, I traveled to Kraków, where I was accepted to work as a transport supervisor at the WOJ M.O. headquarters. I worked there less than a year and resigned because the work did not suit me. I started working at a Kraków enterprise for cattle circulation - livestock as transport manager. In this position I worked about 3 years. I resigned and received work at the enterprise being built - NOWA HUTA. There I encountered severe antisemitic phenomena. This was expressed in their attitude toward Jewish workers. Difficulties in accepting new ones and various abuses. I continued supervising transport and when one day I hired a Jewish woman named Victoria Dichter (currently in Israel), a revolt was organized against her acceptance, but somehow I came out of it with the upper hand. In various ways they came to me with complaints that I had hired a Jewish woman. Relations were quite tense. Upon my arrival in Kraków I established a new family, I married a wife - now I have a wife, a teacher by profession, and also 2 children. Meanwhile, that is to say in the years 1947/48, I participated in Zionist organization activities in the Kraków area (Poalei Zion) and in sending people across the border. Besides this, I helped the organization financially by paying sums for the benefit of "Fighting Palestine." I have written confirmations of this. To Israel I wanted