-7-
fate. Since they did not want to unshackle us, I had to carry the corpse
on my back for 4 km. Only along the way, at some prison during a rest
stop, was I unshackled and shackled again to another prisoner, one
Jan Zawadzki. We were driven back in the direction of
Krasnystaw. In Krasnystaw we stopped at the local prison. The prison warden took pity on us and ordered soup to be cooked
for us. We were unshackled and placed in cells. At night
at 2 o'clock a bomb hit one of the corners of the prison. The guards,
frightened, left us locked in the cells and fled, taking
our personal belongings onto carts. In the morning - seeing that there was no
prison administration, we began breaking down the doors. The door of my
cell was broken down first. I found tools and opened
all the doors. - We were free, but still locked in the
prison courtyard. We made a human ladder, got ourselves
onto the wall and began calling for help. The local population came
to our aid, broke down the main gate and we were finally
truly free. - Now we split up into small groups and
set off on our way. My travel companion was quite a characteristic
figure. He was a Jew, by profession a so-called mohel. He had been sentenced to 15 years
in prison for the following incident: his daughter had an illegitimate
child with a Pole who had abandoned her. The grandfather wanted to make
his grandson a Jew, so he subjected him to circumcision - after which the child died.
For this crime he received a sentence and just like me, the war freed
him. We headed in the direction of Lwów. Approximately 5-6 km
before Lwów, Soviet soldiers stopped me and took me
to the Commandant's office as a suspicious person without any documents. On my shirt I also had the stamp of the Świętokrzyskie
prison. After lengthy interrogations I was released. By that
time the military campaign in Poland had ended and the Soviet Army
had occupied the territories of Western Ukraine and Belarus. When the Germans withdrew
from Borysław, I went to my home town. I decided
to volunteer for the Soviet Army. I treated this step as
a continuation of my pre-war struggle against nationalism. I was accepted and assigned as a driver to the Chief of the Sanitary
Service of the city of Lwów, Major Chernikhov. With him I traveled for a longer