-3-
in strength and determination. The Jewry of Borysław was generally a solidary and organized community. This was influenced by the fact that most Jews worked in large petroleum enterprises, ozokerite works, and similar. Moreover, there were many craftsmen, porters, transport workers, and others. The merchant class was also quite numerous. When the organized antisemitic movement began, the stance of these many groups was generally solidary, though it was limited to so-called passive resistance. Protection was sought primarily through legal means from administrative and police authorities. Influence in various Polish circles was used to curb anti-Jewish actions, of course with varying success. As far as I can recall, until Piłsudski's death in 1935, such interventions often achieved immediate successes. I remember that after Piłsudski's death, many Jews in Borysław wept sincerely. For they tied their fate, the stability of their situation, to the person of Piłsudski. The creation of the Camp of National Unity, and thus the quasi-official patronage of antisemitic action, considerably invigorated the nationalist elements of Borysław. At the head of this action stood people from the "Strzelec" organization, Sokół organizations, and the like. Various riffraff and hooligans naturally joined them as well. Incidents of Jews being beaten by gangs composed precisely of the aforementioned elements began to occur with increasing frequency. An economic boycott action began on a large scale, with picketing of Jewish shops. Nationalist elements felt more firmly in the saddle, sensing the tacit support of the ruling factors. Hence the previous forms of Jewish defense were becoming insufficient. That is why, partly on my initiative at that time, the group of our youth which I have already mentioned began to react more actively to the persecutions. Namely, if word reached us that Jewish shops were to be picketed at such and such a place, or that Jews were simply being attacked—we would launch a retaliatory action. There were a dozen or so of us, young, healthy, and athletic people, but above all determined to provide help to those being attacked. The Jewry of Borysław, Drohobycz, and other smaller localities knew