-9-

I also had the opportunity to provide material assistance to people, which I did in relation to many Polish Jews. Some of them are currently in Israel today, for example: Mr. Feldinger residing in Bat-Yam, the Oppenheim family from Tel Aviv, and others. After the liberation of the Lwów territories at the turn of 1944/45, I was assigned to organize a railway hospital in Lwów on Krasickich Street as the administrative director. There too I used my position and connections to provide assistance to my brethren. In one case of intervention, I went too far and suffered the consequences myself. Namely, a certain Mr. Leon Mandel (currently in Israel, Givatayim) was arrested by the NKVD for trading in currency and gold. He faced 10 years in prison, as the Russians treat such matters as political offenses. I intervened on his behalf and was also arrested by the NKVD on charges of aiding or complicity. I spent 3 months in prison, nothing was proven against me, but I was completely ruined and robbed of everything I possessed. I was released and, while answering charges as a free man, I was sentenced to 1 year in prison with suspension. Despite the lesson I received, I did not give up; I still managed to get the aforementioned Mandel out of prison, transport him to the border, from where he fled to Poland. Of course, I did not return to work; I managed to leave as a repatriate to Poland. I wish to add that after returning to Lwów, I went to Borysław to search for my family. From the few Borysław residents who remained alive, I learned that my entire family had been murdered by the Germans and buried in a mass grave near the slaughterhouse in Borysław. Including my wife and child. They had not managed to evacuate together with me. After arriving in Poland, I went to Kraków, where I was accepted for work as a traffic inspector at the Voivodeship Citizens' Militia Headquarters. I worked there for less than a year and resigned, as the work did not suit me. I took up employment at the Kraków Enterprise for Trade in Breeding Animals