- 3 -
0.3_1619

Description of the witness's character and summary of his testimony.

The witness Shmuel Kostman possesses rich memories. In fact, one must distinguish between 2 periods in his life. The first period - until World War II. During this period, the witness actively participates in the struggle against national persecution - antisemitism. This is a form of struggle - revenge - against the antisemites and their gangs. If one takes into account that generally the form of revenge was passive, based on legal foundations, it is fitting to emphasize and describe in this light the actions of Shmuel Kostman. In certain Jewish circles there exists an opinion that Diaspora Jewry constituted a fainthearted mass, incapable of decisive resistance. Kostman's stance testifies to the contrary. In addition to this, Kostman was sentenced by a Polish court to 10 years imprisonment for his participation precisely in an act of revenge - for his attempt to seek justice in his own way, at a time when legal avenues were disappointing. With the outbreak of the war - the prison gates open before him, however it seems to me that one can determine that Shmuel Kostman is a man with merits in the struggle of the Jews for human dignity, regardless of whether you agree with this form of struggle or not. Here the facts determine.

The second period is the period of war at the front in the ranks of the Red Army against the German Army. The witness emphasizes in his testimony that he regarded this war as a continuation of the war against nationalism. This time its flag bearers were the Hittites [i.e., Nazis]. One can accept this determination if one takes into account his stance from before the war and also his maturity and life experience. Severely wounded, the witness leaves the army as a disabled person. The return to normal life is not easy. Even after the end of the war, the witness dedicates himself to Jewish matters and proves thereby that a warm Jewish heart truly beats within him.

15.04.1960

The Testimony.

The witness arrived in the country in June 1958.

By Mr. Richard Lewinsky (-)

Details about family members:

Name of his wife: MATYLDA, born in 1914, daughter of Moshe and Anna.

Names of his sisters: Genia, Lutza, Ida.

Name of his brothers: Edmund (perished in Borysław in 1941)
Victor (resides in Poland).

-