-1-
Characterization of the witness and summary of testimony
1212 700-P
03/1619
The witness Samuel Kostman has rich experiences behind him.
One should actually distinguish separate periods in his life.-
The first period until the outbreak of the Second World War. In this
period the witness takes an active part in the struggle against
nationalist-antisemitic persecution. This is a form of
retaliatory action against antisemites and their militant groups. Con-
sidering that a more common form among Jews was that of pas-
sive resistance-based on legal grounds-the activity of
Samuel Kostman appears all the more worthy of emphasis
and discussion in this light. In some Jewish circles there prevails
a current belief that diaspora Jewry constituted entirely
a cowardly mass incapable of an act of determined resistance. Kost-
man's attitude represents a directly opposite example. On top of every-
thing, Kostman is sentenced by a Polish court to 10 years
in prison precisely for participation in retaliatory action, for attempting to seek
justice by his own means, when legal forms
fail. The outbreak of war opens the prison gates before him. It seems,
however, that one can risk asserting that Samuel Kostman
is a man of merit in the Jewish struggle for their own dignity,
for human dignity-regardless of whether one approves of these
forms of struggle or not. Here the objective meaning of the facts decides.-
The second period is the period of combat at the front in the ranks of the Soviet
army against the Hitlerite forces. The witness emphasizes in his
testimony that he treated this struggle as a continuation of the fight against nation-
alism, this time against its most bestial carriers.
One can accept this assertion considering both his prewar
attitude as well as his mature age and life experience.-
Severely wounded, the witness leaves the military ranks as an invalid.
Return to normal life is not easy. Even after the end
of the war, the witness endeavors wherever he can to help the Jewish
cause, proving that a truly warm, Jewish heart beats within him.
15.4.1960
/-/ Ryszard Luninski, M.A.